---
title: Justice
---

## Rich World, Poor World
The gap between rich and poor countries is widening, and will never close if the present system of international trade and economic organisation is allowed to continue. The internal policies of our government are based on eliminating poverty and inequality - surely our external policies should have the same set of values? A just world order and a stable world economy is essential if starving millions are to be fed, homeless people housed, and illiterates educated to reach their full potential. Three main kinds of assistance are needed for the underprivileged areas: relief aid, development projects, and help with political, economic and social change. Multi-national corporations have too much control in too many foreign countries - including New Zealand.

## International Relations

There's a great need for mankind to be united - to become one species on planet earth, rather than a multitude of fragmented and bickering “nations”. The United Nations has a major role to play in any attempt to break down international differences. Just as it is essential for New Zealand to develop a stable society, a just, environmentally-sound world order must be developed if mankind is to survive. Control and use of the sea and the sea-bed is one area in which international co-operation could be readily achieved. The Antarctic is another. New Zealand must be independent and non-aligned if it is to give a lead in the new attitude to international relations.

## Individual Freedom
Individual freedom must be allowed unless it is clearly outweighed by the interests of the community as a whole. In the matter of abortion, people must have freedom to plan their own families. The Values Party supports free and and sterilisation, as well as freedom of individual conscience. readily available contraception adult citizenship, although some censorship may be necessary in Censorship inhibits the development of responsible the interests of children. There is a need for extensive safeguards to ensure the confidentiality of data collected on the affairs of individuals. The State should have no role in regulating sexual practices between consenting adults in private. Present drug laws are inconsistent and often make the problem worse - but the Values Party does not advocate the use of drugs in any form. Greater controls are needed on the use of firearms.

## Status of Women
New Zealand practises a form of sexual apartheid. Children are taught concepts of masculinity and feminity which encourage boys to be adventurous, curious and rough, girls to be decorative, helpful and clean. There is no reason why both males and females should not share these qualities. Equality for women should not simply enable women to share a man’s world on male terms. The status of the traditional female values which stress co-operation, nurturing, healing, cherishing and peace, should be raised, these are the values which are needed if everyone is to survive. Men and women should share work and home environments - there is no reason why both can’t be breadwinners, and it is generally desirable for both to spend time bringing up children.

## Race Relations
The task ahead is not to assimilate the Maori but to help him foster his racial and cultural identity. There is much in Maori society, particularly the traditional attitudes to land - which could contribute to a stronger, healthier total society ~ -if the pakeha and could accept it. The Values Party would encourage the development of urban marae, train police recruits employers in race relations, and support unions which promote courses for immigrant Polynesian workers.

## Crime and Punishment
Prisons isolate inmates from the community, and deprive them not only of freedom but also of their self-respect and rather than decreases, the This makes it difficult for released prisoners to readjust to society and increases, must be imprisoned, the only punishment inflicted by society that they will offend again. If a law-breaker should be the deprivation of freedom, for this is the most valued of human rights. Emphasis should be placed on and on training offenders to live within the accepted norms of society. Alternatives should be found to rehabilitation The prisons, and prisons themselves made as congenial and normal as possible, to reduce unrest and aid rehabilitation. humanity. possibility community should be encouraged to interact with prisons and other penal institutions.